---
layout: post
title: "Network Computing Midterm Notes"
date: "2016-03-03 19:21:42 Central Standard Time"
---

Know the OSI and TCP/IP model
-----------------------------

* Remember this: All People Seem To Need Data Processing.

OSI model layers are as follows:

1. Physical
2. Data Link
3. Network
4. Transport
5. Session
6. Presentation
7. Application

TCP/IP model layers are as follows:

1. Network Access (OSI layers 1+2)
2. Internet (OSI Layer 3)
3. Transport (OSI Layer 4)
4. Application (OSI layers 5-7)

For simplicity, layers will be referred to as their layer number (L1, L2, etc.)

Addressing
==========

* Addressing is typically(!) used at L2 and L3.
* L2 addressing is physical addressing, i.e. MAC addresses.
* L3 addressing is logical addressing, i.e. IPv4/IPv6 addresses.

* (!) My instructor implied that port numbers were a L4 address. I've never referred to ports as such, but if it crops up on the exam, well, there it is.

Devices
=======

* Pretty sure they're going to ask which intermediary devices belongs to which layer, so...
* Switches operate at L2. They forward stuff based on MAC address.
* Routers operate at L3. They use logical addresses to transport packets between networks.
* Hubs and wireless access points operate at L1.

The PDU
=======

* It's a piece of data at any layer.
* Succeeding layers encapsulate PDU from the previous layer.

PDU names, organized by TCP/IP layer number:

1. Frame (medium dependent)
2. Packet
3. Segment
4. Data

Protocols
=========

Common protocols, organized by TCP/IP layer number:

1. PPP, Frame Relay, Ethernet
2. IPv4, IPv6, ICMPv4, ICMPv6
3. TCP, UDP
4. HTTP, DNS, DHCP, FTP

Key Terms
=========

Damn, this is broad. Refer to the flashcard stuff on Netacad for chapters 3-6, since they deal with layers.

Or you can do all of the flashcards. They're not too bad.

Chapter 3:

* Encoding: modify data to a format to be transmitted
* Decoding: modify transmitted data into usable data
* Encapsulation: Putting messages into messages
* De-encapsulation: Taking messages out of messages
* Segmentation: Spliting data into smaller pieces for transmission
* Unicast: Destined for a single host.
* Multicast: Destined for a group of hosts.
* Broadcast: Destined for all hosts.
* Open Standard: Protocols that are available to the public at no cost.
* Proprietary: Protocols that are developed by companies and are available to the public for purchase.
* PDU: Protocol Data Unit. See above.
* Default Gateway: Router that is responsible for redirecting packets to their destination.

Chapter 4:

* Bandwidth: The maximum rate that data can be carried over a medium.
* Throughput: Actual amount of data that crosses a given point in a network over time.
* Goodput: Usable data that crosses a point in a network over time.
* EMI: Electromagnetic interference. When an electrmagnetic field affects other electromagnetic fields.
* RFI: Radio frequency intereference. EMI that's in the radio frequency range.
* Crosstalk: When signals on one wire affect signals on another wire.
* Cancellation: Twisting wires to eliminate crosstalk.
* Header: Information that is added before the data field in a frame.
* Trailer: Information that is added after the data field in a frame.
* Physical Topology: The actual connections and layout of devices in a network.
* Logical Topology: The way that data travels through the network.
* Contention-Based Access: Nodes compete to be able to use the network medium.
* Controlled Access: Nodes have an orderly opportunity to access the medium.
* FCS: Frame check sequence. Computed from frame contents and determines if the frame is damaged.
* Full Duplex: Simultaneous sending and receiving.
* Half Duplex: Non-simultaneous sending and receiving, i.e. one direction at a time.

Chapter 5:

* OUI: Organizationally Unique Identifier. 3-byte code that is assigned by IEEE to identify the vendor of a network interface card. It's the first part of your MAC address.
* ARP: Address Resolution Protocol. Used to find a L2 address when an L3 address is known.
* Auto-MDIX: Configures interfaces by detecting the type of cable. Eliminates the problem of straight-through vs. crossover.
* Store and Forward: Switching method that receives an entire frame before forwarding.
* Cut-through: Switching method that forwards as soon as possible, i.e. when a forwarding decision can be made.
* Fast-forward: Forwards data as soon as a destination address has een received.
* Fragment-free: Forwards data as soon as the first 64 bytes of a frame are eceived.

Chapter 6:
==========

* Routing: The process of sending packets to hosts on a remote network.
* MTU: The larget PDU that is supported.
* TTL: Time to Live. A value that limits the lifetime of a packet.
* Administrative Distance: The trustworthiness of a route.
* Next-Hop: Destination router indicated by the outgoing interface in a routing table.
* RAM: Random Access Memory. Volatile memory that stores `running-config` and tables generated by the device.
* ROM: Read-only memory. Contains a limited IOS and instructions for the router.
* NVRAM: Non-volatile RAM. Stores `startup-config`.
* Hostname: A way to identify a networking device.
* Flash: Non-volatile memory that stores the IOS image and system files.
* Connectionless: A connection is not required to send data.
* In-band Configuration: Requires the establishment of a network connection to configure the device.
* Out-of-band Configuration: Requires a direct physical connection to configure the device.
* Default Gateway: Allows devices on a network to communicate with other networks.
* Metric: Used by a routing protocol to determine the best route to put in a routing table.

Troubleshooting
===============

* In the context of the OSI model, troubleshooting is done in three ways:

1. Top-down: L7 to L1
2. Bottom-up: L1 to L7
3. Divide-and-conquer: Lx to L1 or L7.

* ...Yeah.

The various tables and how to deal with them
--------------------------------------------

Routing table
=============

* Lists the ways to get to certain networks.
* Will list information such as the destination network, the next router, administrative distance, metric, outgoing interface, and how the route was learned.

ARP table
=========

* Lists IP addresses mapped to MAC addresses.

Switch MAC address table
========================

* Lists which MAC addresses are associated with each switch port.

Binary, Hex, and Decimal conversions
------------------------------------

* I can't teach you numbering systems, dude.
* You also learned this last term.

Tell time, too!
===============

* ???????????//

Create and troubleshoot a small functioning network
---------------------------------------------------

PC firewall settings
====================

* Windows Firewall
* Windows Firewall with Advanced Security

* It's the reason why pings fail 90% of the time. Temporarily disable it when you're building a network.

PC IPv4 settings
================

* Network and sharing center > change adapter settings > some interface > properties > ipv4 configuration

PC interfaces
=============

* `ipconfig`? network adapter settings? Those will give you your interfaces, physical and virtual.

Troubleshooting commands
========================

* `netstat -r`: Your routing table.
* `ipconfig /all`: Everything you need to know about your network interfaces.
* `arp -a`: Your ARP table.
* `ping`: Test connectivity.
* `tracert`: Trace the route to a certain host. Useful for narrowing down errors.

Recognize and connect correct cables to correct interfaces
----------------------------------------------------------

* Square peg fits in square hole.
* Auto-MDIX is our lord and saviour.

Configure a Router
------------------

Establish initial console connection
====================================

* Plug in a console cable.
* Throw up PuTTY/TeraTerm/whatever.

Configure interfaces
====================

{% highlight ios %}
line console 0
	password killme
	login
line vty 0 15
	password killme
	login
interface gi0/0
	ip address 255.255.255.255 255.255.255.255
	description Kill me.
	no shutdown
{% endhighlight %}

Banners
=======

{% highlight ios %}
banner motd +LALALALALALA I'm A BANNER LEL+
{% endhighlight %}

Password protect the router
===========================

* Refer to line configurations above as well.

{% highlight ios %}
enable password something
enable secret somethingelse
service password-encryption
{% endhighlight %}

Save configurations
===================

* `copy running-config startup-config`
* or, if you're ballsy, `write memory`

Troubleshooting
===============

* `show ip interface brief`: Shows info about interfaces.
* `show ip route`: Displays the routing table.
* `show running-config`: Shows the running configuration.
* `show arp`: Shows the ARP table.
* `show version`: Shows version information.
* `traceroute`: Tests connectivity and shows the path.
* `ping`: Tests connectivity.

Configure a Switch
------------------

* Configuration commands for a router can often translate over to a switch.

SVI configuration
=================

{% highlight ios %}
interface vlan 1
	ip address 255.255.255.255 255.255.255.255
{% endhighlight %}

Troubleshooting
===============

* `show mac-address table`: Shows the MAC address table.

How is data encapsulated and de-encapsulated?
---------------------------------------------

* Computer messages are encapsulated in a specific format.
* Each layer typically does this with PDUs.
* Headers and trailers are added, with addressing and control information.
* When a host receives the PDU, it strips away these headers to get the data within.

What is the purpose of a switch?
--------------------------------

* A switch is an intermediary device that works at L2.
* It uses MAC addresses to make forwarding decisions.

What is the purpose of a router?
--------------------------------

* Routers are intermediary devices that work at L3.
* For packets to travel to other networks, a router is required.

Common UTP cables
-----------------

* Straight-through: Both ends or of the same standard (T568A or T568B).
* Crossover: Both ends use different standards.
* Rollover: Cisco proprietary. Use for console configuration.

* Cat 3: Used for voice communication and phone lines
* Cat 5/5e: Used for data transmission. Cat 5 supports 100Mb/s and 1000Mb/s (not recommended), Cat 5e supports 1000Mb/s.
* Cat 6: Used for data transmission. Separates pairs for for speed. Supports 1000 Mb/s - 10 Gb/s (not recommended).

Bandwidth, Throughput, Goodput
------------------------------

* Bandwidth: The maximum rate that data can be carried over a medium.
* Throughput: Actual amount of data that crosses a given point in a network over time.
* Goodput: Usable data that crosses a point in a network over time.

Addressing
----------

* Multicast: 224.0.0.0 - 239.255.255.255
* Multicast on local network: 224.0.0.0 - 224.0.0.255

* Directed broadcast: network broadcast address
* limited broadcast: 255.255.255.255

* Loopback: 127.0.0.0/8

* Link-local: 169.254.0.0/16

* Unicast: Literally anything else!

* Default route: Route should go to 0.0.0.0/0.











